[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant,
and welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment."
This is your go-to show
that offers practical tips
from expert guests at the
end of every episode designed
to help you be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
The quest for living a
spiritually empowered life
can often seem at odds with
the demands of a person
in the modern world.
But aspirations like
always being at peace
or being happy all of
the time are not really
the true spiritual goals
of most traditions.
My guest today is
Dr. Paul Dugliss,
an M.D. of Internal Medicine,
a qualified practitioner
of acupuncture and
traditional Chinese medicine.
He also holds a master's
degree in clinical psychology.
With his unique blend of Eastern
and Western medical knowledge,
Dr. Dugliss finds
his current practice
of Ayurvedic medicine
and spiritual counseling
to be the most rewarding.
He is the author of
many books, including
"Ayurveda, The Power to Heal,"
"Enlightened Nutrition,"
"Patanjali in the Light,"
and "Think with the Heart,
Love with the Mind."
Dr. Dugliss, thanks so much
for being here with me today.
>> You're very welcome.
>> So how do you see these
unrealistic spiritual
aspirations manifesting
in your practice?
>> Yeah.
I mean, I see them all the time.
And I think what
happens is that we
get into this misconception,
this mistake when it comes
to inner development
where we're mistaking
the end for the means,
where we see somebody who's
very peaceful and say, oh, OK,
the way to get there is for me
to try to be
peaceful, or where we
see somebody who's very
unattached and very blissful--
oh, OK, so I'll try
to be unattached,
I'll try to be blissful
and that will get me there.
And what we don't
understand is that
what's happening for that
individual is the results
of their inner state.
It's not the means
to that inner state.
It's the result of
the inner development.
>> Right.
So we don't just meditate
or think about being happy
or just aspire to be
peaceful all the time
as our actual practice to
get us towards inner peace.
>> Exactly.
And this is where I
think the other tragedy
that I see is that people
don't understand that there are
different paths for different
people and that a lot of people
get drawn to the
ascetic traditions.
They get drawn to this
concept of non-attachment,
and they try to
move towards that
and don't realize that
it may not fit for them,
that there are
very few people who
are designed to be monks,
who are designed to be away
from society, designed
to be away from family,
and that there actually
is a whole set of paths
for the householder.
>> Sure.
Can you tell us a little bit
about how the ascetic path
manifested or what are some
of the components of it
in traditional yoga
traditions versus some
of the different qualities
or different techniques
of the householder path?
>> The ascetic path, the monk's
path, is based on letting go.
It's actually based on loss.
You move to the ashram.
You get away from society.
You lose connection to society.
You lose connection to wealth.
You lose distractions.
>> And you give up family.
You give up relationships.
And the focus is continually
on letting go, loss, letting
go, loss, less,
less, less, less,
until there's nothing
left, until you finally
connect to your true self.
The householder path is
based on fulfillment.
It's almost the opposite
where we're cultivating
the qualities of the heart.
We're cultivating
that inner bliss.
fulfillment to the point
where we're unaffected.
We're not attached.
There's this analogy that I
love to use with my students
that it's like walking
down the streets
and having your
wallet pickpocketed.
If you're a billionaire,
it's like you've
got so much in the bank, you've
got so much fullness within,
you have so many resources
that it doesn't affect you.
If you're poor and your wallet
has your last money and that's
your last meal, it's
incredibly stressful.
And so, again, the
state of peace,
the state of non-attachment
for the householder
comes from fulfillment.
>> How does fulfillment relate
to something like gratitude?
Or instead of letting
go and releasing
and having to let go and
free and rid ourselves
of all of these
things as if they're
these shameful
tarnishes that we must
get rid of because
they're our humanity
and they're just terrible, and
if we get rid of them, then
we may ascend, but,
rather, what I'm
hearing you say is it's
more of a cultivation
of different aspects
of our awareness
or different aspects
of presence, namely
the experience of fulfillment,
which I'm automatically
connecting to gratitude.
>> So that's a great connection.
Now, it's a little tricky in
that often gratitude comes,
again, from that fullness.
And so trying to force
it, that's not natural.
And I think the thing that
you said that's really key
is it comes through
cultivation of awareness.
But what we don't realize is
that, within our own awareness,
we have all these
potentials, and it's
through the cultivation
of awareness,
and not just being
aware of things,
but cultivation of
consciousness itself,
that really is the foundation of
our fulfillment, the foundation
of our evolution, our
growth, and, ultimately,
the foundation of our health.
>> I love that because I
remember when I first started
on this path and I first
started reading, like,
Patanjali's "Yoga Sutras," which
I know you have a book on, I
just remember reading
some of them and thinking,
this sounds really kind of
impossible when it was being
translated to me as, oh, well,
you have to give up all these
attachments.
You have to be
completely-- you can't
have any violent thoughts.
These concepts
seemed really lofty,
and it kind of brought
up some of the struggles
of my own humanity, which
I've had this conversation
with others of like, oh my
god, am I ever really going
to be able to do that?
So if we're not trying
to, if we're not
taking the ascetic
path and we're not
trying to just release and
let go everything in order
to attain these
qualities or this state,
how is it that the householder
path actually relates to things
or teaches us to relate to
qualities of our humanity
like emotions and relationships?
>> So we're really talking
about the relationship to life
and all aspects of it.
And too often what happens
when we're challenged
is that we go into resistance.
We resist the anger.
Oh, we're not supposed to be--
we're supposed to be peaceful.
We're not supposed
to be violent.
We resist the challenge,
the physical challenge.
We resist the disease.
We resist.
And when we live in
resistance, that's
when we actually create
more of the suffering.
And so the way out is
actually a combination
of cultivating consciousness.
It's also cultivating the
qualities of the heart.
It's also cultivating and
reprogramming the mind such
that we relate to life in
a totally different way.
And let me just explain
this with a question
that I often pose
to my students.
If you knew every challenge,
every problem in your life,
every experience in
your life was organized
by your soul for your
learning and growth,
that you actually planned
it before this life,
how would your life change?
How would your relationship
to life change?
And what I hear from
them is, oh my gosh,
if I really knew that, if
I really accepted that,
then I would drop the worry.
I would drop the resistance.
I would begin to embrace life.
I'd begin to embrace
every moment of life.
And so the key to
be able to have
that kind of radical
acceptance and to really
be embracing of life is
built on a foundation of,
first, cultivating the nervous
system through meditation,
through a type of
meditation that
gives the mind rest, that
allows us to go beyond thought
and feeling and sensation.
It's based, then, on integrating
what we gain in the meditation
into every moment of the life.
And that's accelerated
by practices
that allow us to come
into the heart, that
allow us to connect
with and integrate
that true self through the
heart and the heart's love.
>> If we could just touch for
a moment on this misconception
that people have that we're
essentially stopping the mind
completely because-- and if I
can just get the mind to stop,
then I will somehow, I don't
know, be more enlightened.
But can you talk a
little bit on here?
Because I know you have your--
like, good luck with that.
One of my teacher
says, your mind
is an organ that
secretes thought.
It's just never going
to stop doing that.
So if you could just
talk a little bit
about-- because I know
you have your book
"Think with the Heart,
Love with the Mind."
You talk a little bit about
the relationship between--
I like how you put it--
giving the mind rest
and how that
relates to beginning
to think more or be
embodied with this presence
more of the heart space.
>> Yeah.
So there are two
important aspects.
One has to do with a difference,
a distinction between quietism
where we stop thinking
and where we actually
go into pure consciousness.
And the easiest way to go
into pure consciousness
is through absorption,
being absorbed
in something that's
blissful, often a sound,
being absorbed in a
sound that carries us
to that pure consciousness.
That's very different
than stopping the mind.
So this is--
>> Because the
mind's still there--
>> The mind's still there.
>> And it's probably
still thinking.
We're just not
really immersed in--
>> So what this allows us to do
is to shift our identification
over time.
As we experience more and
more the pure consciousness,
we begin to shift
our identification,
not so much with the
thoughts or with the emotions
or with the body.
We begin to recognize
our true self.
And there is a very
important integration
that needs to take place
of that pure consciousness
with the emotions.
Again, just like--
an enlightened person
still has thoughts.
An enlightened person
still has emotions.
Most people don't
recognize that.
Again, they're not
attached to the emotions.
They're not identified
with the emotions.
And really, one of
the quickest ways
to come to this integration
is through cultivating
the qualities of the heart that
happens as we cultivate more
consciousness, as
we put our attention
more on the core of the heart.
What most people associate
with the heart is some emotion.
But there's more to it.
There are subtler levels to it.
Those subtler levels really
key into things like intuition.
The subtler levels
of the heart key
into the subtle senses and
the ability to perceive energy
and so forth.
The subtle aspects
and even beyond that,
the core of the heart,
is really a window
into that infinite pure
consciousness that we are.
And so we need both.
We need an effortless
meditation practice,
and then we need a practice
during the day that
allows us to connect to
the core of the heart
and to approach things that
arise from that, to approach
accepting and
loving what arises,
accepting the challenge.
Oh OK, I get this bad news.
I accept this
challenge that my soul
arranged this for my
growth, for my wellness,
for something positive.
And I find the positive
quality of love to meet that.
And it's through that
meeting of the challenge,
through developing
that quality of love
that we really
fulfill the purpose
of the experiences of life.
Why do we have
these experiences?
These experiences are
cultivating our divinity.
They're cultivating
that quality of love
that is needed within us for
our growth and development.
And so, actually, all of life,
rather than being resisted
or for us trying
to transcend and go
beyond all the problems,
what life is calling out
for us to do is to find
within us the divinity that's
needed to meet that.
And in doing that, we begin
to realize that life is really
courting our love.
The experiences of life
is the divine courting
us and our heart's love.
>> I love that because it's kind
of the opposite of this feeling
of lack or this feeling of
I have to rid myself of all
of these things, and really
it's the challenge is actually
becoming bigger and more
vast and more loving and more
accepting and more trusting
with life, with someone else,
with food, with ourselves, that
actually it's this invitation
from our highest nature
to expand and to actually
recognize that and be in an
intimate relationship with
whatever is arising as opposed
to having to get past it or be
above it.
>> Beautifully said.
It's exactly this relationship.
So again, the
householders-- it's
all about relationship,
relationship to life,
relationship to others,
relationship to emotion,
and having that ability in that
to rise up, to loving what is,
loving what is.
And then it's easy to be present
because you love each moment.
>> And you're not trying
to push anything else away.
>> You're not trying to push
things away, not at all.
But again, I get a little
bit ahead of myself
in that we need the foundation.
We need the cultivation
of consciousness.
We do need that
effortless meditation that
gives the mind a rest to
cultivate our nervous system
and its ability to identify more
with the pure consciousness.
So we do need that.
But what's missing from--
>> It doesn't just show up.
We actually--
>> --do have to
still do practices--
>> We do have to do something.
>> --and cultivate something.
>> Yeah.
We do have to do something.
And what's been missing, I feel,
is the technique or techniques
to then integrate that.
So again, it's not just,
well, my spirituality
is that I meditate
and that's it.
Again, there's a wholeness
that is being brought forth
because this is the
need of the time.
It really is the need
of the time for us
to have a householder
path, a path that
allows us to experience
the fullness of life,
to experience all that life has
to offer and recognize that it
is the fastest growth possible.
It's faster than
going to the ashram.
>> Yeah.
>> So would you show us a
meditation practice that helps
to cultivate the heart and helps
to expand consciousness to lay
this foundation?
>> Yes.
I'd love to.
I would call it kind of a guided
meditation or a contemplation
almost.
>> OK.
>> I call it heart centering.
And so this heart centering
practice, I think,
can be very valuable.
So I ask everybody
to close their eyes.
And we're going to
start with, first,
an instruction to honor
whatever you feel.
Don't expect, because we're
dealing with the heart,
that you should be
feeling love or joy.
Whatever comes comes,
and we'll work with that.
What we're doing is
going on a journey
to explore what is actually
there in the core of our heart.
So first start by attending
to the physical layer,
to the physical sensation
at the center of the chest,
underneath the mid
sternum, paying attention
to any tension, any sensation
that is in the physical area,
and just observing, just paying
attention without evaluation.
And now we're going to
go a step more subtle
and we're going to pay
attention to the energy
in this area, the energy.
Maybe there's a sense of warmth.
Maybe there's a sense of flow.
Maybe there's a
sense of expansion.
What energy do you
sense in this area?
And going a step
more subtle, we're
going to go to the
emotional layer.
Maybe when you put
your attention here,
you feel some emotion.
Just be innocent.
Experience whatever it
is, whatever emotion
arises for you.
Don't get into analyzing it
or telling a story about it.
Just feel what is present.
Just be present to this emotion.
And notice, as you attend
to it, what happens.
Now, sometimes
there may be, as we
go even deeper inward,
yet another emotion
underneath that one.
So ask, is there
something deeper?
And let yourself go more
in towards the core.
Imagine this emotion that you
experience first as a layer
and see if there is something
layered underneath it.
Maybe there was some
hurt underneath it.
You'll discover some fear.
Whatever it is, just be with it.
Accept it.
Don't analyze.
Just feel the sensations of it.
And now we're going
to go even further
inward beyond the emotions to
the subtlest, finest feeling
level.
There may be a
feeling of expansion.
There may be just
the sense of a void.
There may be some
subtle blissfulness.
Just explore whatever is there.
And if you expected
to feel some love
and you experienced
some space, just a void,
that's perfectly fine.
Maybe there's some dots
of light within a void.
Feel into those.
Whatever you're
experiencing, notice
that, at this subtle
level, it's not dead.
There's a liveliness
even in the spaciousness.
And now allow yourself
to go as deep as you can.
At this core of the
heart, you'll find peace.
At this core, you may experience
some joy or some subtle bliss.
Whatever your experience
is, know it's perfect.
This is the true self.
This is your being.
This is what resides at
the core of the true heart.
And this is always
available to you.
This is always with you.
This is always your essence
and nothing can touch it.
Nothing can change it.
It's always available to you.
And if you do this practice
of coming to the true heart,
if you do this heart centering
practice periodically
throughout the day,
you'll find that you
can meet whatever life brings
with this peace, with this joy,
with this bliss.
You can rapidly integrate
this into the way
you relate to life.
So carry this.
Make this a practice.
Be easy with it.
And be blessed.
>> Thank you so much
for that practice.
So powerful to have that as a
tool for cultivating the heart
space and, most
importantly, like you
said, bringing into every
day and really feeling
that this presence
is with us always.
So thank you so
much for sharing.
It's always great
to talk with you.
Yeah.
>> You're very welcome.
It's been a joy.
>> And thanks so
much for joining us.
I will see you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]